insights: update dev docs (#30499)
sourcegraph/sourcegraph: doc/dev/background-information/insights/backend.md

With version 3.31 this flag has moved from the `repo-updater` service to the `worker` service.

### Sourcegraph Setting

> Code Insights is currently behind an experimental feature flag on Sourcegraph. You can enable it in settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Code Insights is currently enabled by default on customer instances 3.32 and later, but can be disabled from appearing in the UI by setting this flag to false. 
```

Recently our distribution team has started to encourage customers to use managed DB solutions as the product grows. Given entire categories of customers
would be excluded from using Code Insights, we have decided we must move away from TimescaleDB.

We are currently in progress to retire TimescaleDB in favor of the standard vanilla Postgres image that ships with Sourcegraph. This will simplify our operations, support, and likely
will not present a performance problem given the primary constraint on Code Insights is search throughput.

> The current timeline is planned that this migration will begin in 3.37, and finish in 3.38.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The current timeline is planned such that this migration will begin in 3.37, and finish in 3.38.
```

## Insight Metadata
Historically, insights ran entirely within the Sourcegraph extensions API on the browser. These insights are limited to small sets of manually defined repositories
since they execute in real time on page load with no persistence of the timeseries data. Sourcegraph extensions have access to settings (user / org / global) ,
so the original storage location for extension based insight metadata (query string, labels, title, etc) was settings.

During beta, insight metadata were stored in Sourcegraph settings files, and periodically synced to the backend database.

As of 3.35, Code Insights data is stored entirely in the `codeinsights-db` database, and exposed through a GraphQL API. Settings are deprecated as a storage
option, although the text in the settings will persist unless deleted. In this release Code Insights shipped an [out of band migration](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/-/blob/enterprise/internal/insights/migration/migration.go) that automatically migrates

> all data from settings to the database for the last time, and disables the previously running sync jobs.

Reviewer 2: The migration itself doesn't really disable the sync jobs, right? It might be worth pointing out the feature flag (`ENABLE_CODE_INSIGHTS_SETTINGS_STORAGE`) is responsible for the sync job, separately from the oob migration.

Author: What do you think about the suggestion I put inline?

Reviewer 2: Looks good!

> all data from settings to the database for the last time, and disables the previously running sync jobs.

Author: ```suggestion
all data from settings to the database for the last time. 3.35 also disabled the previously running sync jobs by default, which can be re-enabled using an environment variable feature flag `ENABLE_CODE_INSIGHTS_SETTINGS_STORAGE` on the `worker` and `frontend` services. This flag is not meant to be used and is only provided as a last resort option for any users unable to use Code Insights.
```

## Life of an insight

### Unique ID

> An Insight View is defined to have a globally unique referencable ID. Each ID is [generated when the view is created](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=context:global+repo:%5Egithub%5C.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph%24+file:%5Eenterprise/internal/insights/resolvers/insight_view_resolvers%5C.go+UniqueID:%5Cs*ksuid.New%28%29.String%28%29%2C&patternType=regexp).

Reviewer 2: Do we still plan to deprecate this in favor of using the db id? I had it on the chopping block in my head.

[Read more about Insight Views](./insight_view.md)

#### A note about data series
Currently, data series are can be defined with a repository scope that will ultimately define how the series is generated. Any series that is provided a repository scope will be executed
just-in-time, whereas any series missing a repository scope will be assumed to be global and will be recorded in the background. This is an area of improvement in Q1, where we will likely
integrate with other "repository group" objects such as Search Contexts.

> Data series are [uniquely identified by a randomly generated unique ID](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=context:global+repo:%5Egithub%5C.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph%24+file:%5Eenterprise/internal/insights/resolvers/insight_view_resolvers%5C.go+SeriesID:%5Cs*ksuid.New%28%29.String%28%29%2C&patternType=regexp).

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above: I recall that you thought it might be useful to keep the `seriesId` around rather than rely on the db id, but if we are using the compound key rather than the hash, was there still a reason for that?

Author: The `seriesId` is useful to have a universal reference that may not be a database constraint. We actually do reference the `insight_series` using ID internally sometimes. I think having some kind of referenceable ID is still important, the compound key doesn't translate very well to other data sources (such as the timeseries data).

Data series are defined with a [recording interval](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/-/blob/enterprise/internal/insights/types/types.go?L86-87) that will define the frequency of samples that are taken for the series.

Data series are also given a field that describes how the series can be populated, called [generation_method](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/-/blob/enterprise/internal/insights/types/types.go?L106-110#tab=references).
These `generation_method` types will allow the insights backend to select different behaviors depending on the series definition, for example, to execute a `compute` query instead of a standard search.

#### A note about capture group insight series
A standard search series will execute Sourcegraph searches, and tabulate the count based on the number of matches in the response. A highly requested feature from our customers
was to be able to derive the series themselves from the results; that is to say a result of `(result: 1.17, count: 5) (result: 1.13, count: 3)` would generate two individual time series,
one for each unique result.

> We support this behavior by tabulating the results of a `compute` search, and dynamically modifying the series that are returned. These series can be calculated both [globally](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/-/blob/enterprise/internal/insights/resolvers/insight_view_resolvers.go?L160:6&subtree=true), and 

Reviewer 2: I think a link to something to describe what `compute` is could be very helpful here! Maybe even just pointing to the place in the code where it's used? It might just help make it clear that we're using different endpoints for different searches.

with changes since its previous refresh. Metadata for each repositories refresh is tracked in a table `commit_index_metadata`. 

To avoid race conditions with the index, data frames are only [filtered](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph@55be9054a2609e06a1d916cc2f782827421dd2a3/-/blob/enterprise/internal/insights/compression/compression.go?L84)
out if the `commit_index_metadata.last_updated_at` is greater than the data point we are attempting to compress. Additionally, if the index does not contain enough history (the commit
falls before the oldest commit in the index), all of the data frames prior to the history will be uncompressed.

> Currently, we only generate 12 months of history for this commit index to keep it reasonably sized. We do not currently do any pruning, but is an area that will need development in the future.

Reviewer: Is this true? Even though folks can set time intervals to >12 months now?

Author: Yes, we start the index 12 months out and keep it up to date. This is something we will need to improve at some point.

This flag is represented as the database field `insight_series.backfill_queued_at` and is [set](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=context:global+repo:%5Egithub%5C.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph%24%4055be905+StampBackfill&patternType=literal) at the end of the complete repository iteration.

This semantic does not fully capture all possible states. For example, if a repository encounters a `soft` error (unable to fetch git metadata, for example)
it will be skipped and ultimately not populate in the data series. Improving this is an area of design and work in FY23.

### (4) The queryrunner worker gets work and runs the search query

The queryrunner ([code](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph@55be9054a2609e06a1d916cc2f782827421dd2a3/-/blob/enterprise/internal/insights/background/queryrunner/worker.go)) is a background goroutine running in the `worker` service of Sourcegraph ([code](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph@55be9054a2609e06a1d916cc2f782827421dd2a3/-/blob/enterprise/internal/insights/background/queryrunner/worker.go?L42:6)), it is responsible for:

> 1. Dequeueing search queries that have been queued by the either the current, spapshot, or historical recorder. Queries are stored with a `priority` field that 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Dequeueing search queries that have been queued by the either the current, snapshot, or historical recorder. Queries are stored with a `priority` field that 
```
